SSZ and Merkleization wiki pages (#244)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/CL/merkleization.md

# Merkleization and Hash Tree Roots 

> In Ethereum consensus mechanism, it's critical for all participating nodes to agree on the state of the system consistently and efficiently. The [Simple Serialize (SSZ)](/docs/wiki/CL/SSZ.md) framework facilitates this through Merkleization, a process that transforms serialized data into a Merkle tree structure. This wiki page discusses the intricacies of Merkleization and its importance in ensuring a shared state across nodes in a scalable and secure manner.

Reviewer: I would add that the Merkleization scheme allows access to beacon state proofs for constrained environments like light clients

## Process of Merkleization

Merkleization involves breaking down the serialized data into 32-byte chunks, which serve as the leaves of a Merkle tree. These chunks are then combined pair-wise, hashed together, and the process is repeated up the tree until a single hash—the Merkle root—is derived. This root hash acts as a unique fingerprint for the entire dataset. The key steps are as below:

- **Chunking:** Divide the serialized data into 32-byte chunks.
- **Tree Construction:** Pair up the chunks and hash each pair to form the next level of the tree. Repeat this step until only one hash remains: the Merkle root.
- **Padding:** If the number of chunks isn't a power of two, additional zero-value chunks are added to round out the tree, ensuring that the tree is balanced.

## Benefits of Merkleization

- **Performance Efficiency:** While the tree requires hashing approximately twice the original data amount, caching mechanisms can store the roots of subtrees that don't change often. This significantly reduces the computational overhead as only altered parts of the data need re-hashing.

> - **Light Client Support:** The Merkle tree structure supports the creation of Merkle proofs—small pieces of data that prove the inclusion and integrity of specific parts of the state without needing the entire dataset. This feature is crucial for light clients, which operate with limited resources and rely on these proofs to interact with  Ethereum securely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Light Client Support:** The Merkle tree structure supports the creation of Merkle proofs—small pieces of data that prove the inclusion and integrity of specific parts of the state without needing the entire dataset. This feature is crucial for light clients, which operate with limited resources and rely on these proofs to interact with Ethereum securely.
```

> ## Merkle Tree Structure and Hashing

Reviewer: I am not sure if we need to cover merkle tree basics here. It's also mentioned on EL/data-structures and maybe you can just reference an external resource to keep the article shorter. 
We wrote a merkle tree primer for Summer of protocol, I will link it when it's published

  - This result is combined with the hash from index 3 to work up to the next level.
- **Final Verification**: The combined result from the previous step is hashed with the root from the opposite branch (index 3) to produce the ultimate tree root (`hash 1`).
- **Integrity Check**: If the calculated root matches the known good root (`hash 1`), the data at index 9 is verified as accurate. If the data was incorrect, the resulting root would differ, indicating an error or tampering.

There are helper functions in the consensus specs to calculate the multiproofs and generalized indices. You can find [here.](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/ssz/merkle-proofs.md#merkle-multiproofs)

## Calculating Hash Tree Roots

The hash tree root of an SSZ object is computed recursively. For basic types and collections of basic types, the data is packed into chunks and directly Merkleized. For composite types like containers, the process involves hashing the tree roots of each component. In the below sections we will see the working examples to understand the process.

### Packing and Chunking

> Packing and chunking are crucial concepts in the context of Merkleization, especially when dealing with the SSZ used in the Beacon chain. Here's how packing and chunking work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packing and chunking enable the Merkleization with SSZ by formatting the serialized data and dividing them into pieces which are then hashed to a Merkle tree. Here's how the process works:
```
